Changes for Version 3.0.0 release (#374)
VDA5050/VDA5050: VDA5050_EN.md

![logo](./assets/logo.png)

# Interface for the Communication between Mobile Robots and a Fleet Control

## VDA 5050

## Version 3.0.0 - Release Candidate (not released by the VDA)

![Fleet control system and mobile robots](./assets/csagv.png)

### Brief information

Definition of a communication interface for driverless transport systems (DTS).
This recommendation describes the communication interface for exchanging information between a central fleet control and mobile robots.

### Disclaimer

> The following explanations serve as an indication for the execution of an interface for communication between mobile robots and the fleet control and one that is freely applicable to everyone and is non-binding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following explanations serve as an indication for the execution of an interface for communication between mobile robots and a fleet control. It is meant to be freely applicable to everyone and is non-binding.
```

  [7.7 Implementation of the connection message](#77-implementation-of-the-connection-message)<br>
  [7.8 Implementation of the state message](#78-implementation-of-the-state-message)<br>
  [7.9 Implementation of the visualization message](#79-implementation-of-the-visualization-message)<br>
  [7.10 Implementation of the factsheet message](#710-implementation-of-the-factsheet-message)<br>

# 1 Foreword

The objective of this recommendation is to facilitate the integration and efficient operation of mobile robot fleets under the supervision of a centralized fleet control system. This is achieved through the implementation of a standardized, vendor-neutral communication interface that enables interoperability between the fleet control system and individual mobile robots.
The specification for this interface was jointly developed by the Verband der Automobilindustrie e. V. (VDA) and the VDMA e. V..
Stakeholders are invited to submit proposals for modifications or enhancements to the interface. Such proposals shall be submitted via the GitHub-Repository (https://github.com/vda5050/vda5050).
The contribution to this document via GitHub is greatly appreciated.

> The repository can be found at the following link: https://github.com/vda5050/vda5050.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Feels somewhat duplicated with the line above

- Provide a generic toolkit applicable across diverse mobile robot configurations, including variations in navigation principles, mobile robot dimensions, load-handling or manipulation devices, and levels of autonomy.

The interface is designed to be independent of proprietary solutions and applicable across all domains where mobile robots are deployed.
The document also defines a foundational concept for coordinated multi-robot systems, serving as the basis for traffic management and specifying the required logic and expected behavior of mobile robots within such systems.

## 2.1 Exclusions
The following aspects are explicitly outside the scope and are not covered:
- Safety Requirements
	- This document does not constitute a safety standard.
- Traffic Management Logic
	- Strategies and algorithms for traffic control (e.g., routing, prioritization, deadlock resolution).
- Other Communication Interfaces
	- Interfaces beyond fleet control and mobile robots (e.g., peripheral devices, external IT systems)
- Project Coordination
	- Topics such as project management, integration processes, commissioning procedures, and acceptance criteria
- Operational Responsibilities

> 	- Allocation of responsibilities among operators, integrators, vehicle manufacturers, and master control suppliers for planning, operation, maintenance, and safety

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- Allocation of responsibilities among operators, integrators, vehicle manufacturers, and fleet control suppliers for planning, operation, maintenance, and safety
```

- Cybersecurity Aspects
	- This document does not define how to ensure secure data exchange.

## 2.2 Other applicable documents

Document | Version | Description
---|---|---
VDI Guideline 2510 | October 2005 | Driverless transport systems (DTS)
VDI Guideline 4451 Sheet 7 | October 2005 | Compatibility of driverless transport systems (DTS) - DTS master control
DIN EN ISO 3691-4 | December 2023 | Industrial Trucks Safety Requirements and Verification-Part 4: Driverless trucks and their systems
LIF – Layout Interchange Format| March 2024 | Definition of a format of track layouts for exchange between the integrator of the driverless transport mobile robots and a (third-party) master control system.

> ISO 9787 | May 2013 | Robots and robotic devices — Coordinate systems and motion nomenclatures 

Author: Structure - Scheduled for next core team meeting

- Provide a generic toolkit applicable across diverse mobile robot configurations, including variations in navigation principles, vehicle dimensions, load-handling or manipulation devices, and levels of autonomy.

The interface is designed to be independent of proprietary solutions and applicable across all domains where mobile robots are deployed.
The document also defines a foundational concept for coordinated multi-robot systems, serving as the basis for traffic management and specifying the required logic and expected behavior of mobile robots within such systems.

# 3 Exclusions
The following aspects are explicitly outside the scope and are not covered:
- Safety Requirements
	- This document does not constitute a safety standard.
- Traffic Management Logic
	- Strategies and algorithms for traffic control (e.g., routing, prioritization, deadlock resolution).
- Other Communication Interfaces
	- Interfaces beyond master control and mobile robots (e.g., peripheral devices, external IT systems)
- Project Coordination
	- Topics such as project management, integration processes, commissioning procedures, and acceptance criteria
- Operational Responsibilities

> 	- Allocation of responsibilities among operators, integrators, vehicle manufacturers, and master control suppliers for planning, operation, maintenance, and safety

Author: ```suggestion
	- Allocation of responsibilities among operators, integrators, vehicle manufacturers, and master control suppliers for planning, operation, maintenance, and safety
- Cybersecurity Aspects
	- This document does not define how to ensure secure data exchange.
	
```

---|---|---
interfaceName | string | Name of the used interface
majorVersion | string | Major version number of the VDA 5050 recommendation, preceded by "v"
manufacturer | string | Manufacturer of the mobile robot.
serialNumber | string | Unique mobile robot serial number consisting of the following characters: <br>A-Z <br>a-z <br>0-9 <br>_ <br>. <br>: <br>-
topic | string | Topic (e.g., order or state) see Section [3.1.3 Topics for Communication](#313-topics-for-communication)

Note: Since the `/` character is used to define topic hierarchies, it shall not be used in any of the aforementioned fields.

> The `$` character is also used in some MQTT brokers for special internal topics, so it should not be used either.

Author: Content - Scheduled for next core team meeting

### 3.3 Topics for communication

The mobile robot protocol uses the following topics for information exchange between fleet control and mobile robot.

Topic name | Published by | Subscribed by | Used for | Implementation | Schema
---|---|---|---|---|---
order | fleet control | mobile robot | Communication of orders from fleet control to the mobile robot | mandatory | order.schema
instantActions | fleet control | mobile robot | Communication of the actions that are to be executed immediately | mandatory | instantActions.schema
state | mobile robot | fleet control | Communication of the mobile robot state | mandatory | state.schema
visualization | mobile robot | Visualization systems | Higher frequency of position topic for visualization purposes only | optional | visualization.schema

> connection | Broker/mobile robot | fleet control | Indicates when mobile robot connection is lost, not to be used by fleet control for checking the mobile robot health, added for an MQTT protocol level check of connection | mandatory | connection.schema 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connection | broker / mobile robot | fleet control | Indicates when mobile robot connection is lost. Not to be used by fleet control for checking the mobile robot health, added for an MQTT protocol level check of connection | mandatory | connection.schema 
```

Within the routes, stations for loading and unloading, battery charging stations, peripheral environments (gates, elevators, barriers), waiting positions, buffer stations, etc. are defined.
- Mobile robot configuration: The physical properties of a mobile robot (size, available load carrier mounts, etc.) are stored by the operator.
The mobile robot shall communicate this information via the topic `factsheet` in a specific way that is defined in Section [7.10 Implementation of the factsheet message](#710-implementation-of-the-factsheet-message) of this document.

The configuration of routes and the route network described above are not part of this document.
They form the basis for enabling order control and driving course assignment by the fleet control based on this information and the transport requirements to be completed.
The resulting orders for a mobile robot are then transferred to the mobile robot via an MQTT message broker.
This then continuously reports its status to the fleet control in parallel with the execution of the job.
This is also done using the MQTT message broker.

Functions of the fleet control are:
- Assignment of orders to the mobile robots

> - Route calculation and guidance of the mobile robots (taking into account the limitations of the individual physical properties of each mobile robot, e.g., size, maneuverability, etc.)

Reviewer 2: Does not really hold for AMRs
```suggestion
- Route calculation and guidance of line-guided mobile robots (taking into account the limitations of the individual physical properties of each mobile robot, e.g., size, maneuverability, etc.)
```

The fleet control only includes edges in a mobile robot order which the concerning mobile robot is allowed to traverse.

![Figure 3 Graph representation in fleet control and graph transmitted in orders](./assets/graph_representation_transmission.png)
>Figure 3 - Graph representation in fleet control and graph transmitted in orders

The nodes and edges are passed as two lists in the order message.
The order of the nodes and edges within those lists also governs in which sequence the nodes and edges shall be traversed.

For a valid order, there shall be at least one node and the number of edges shall be equal to the number of nodes minus one.

The first node of an order shall be trivially reachable for the mobile robot and released.
This means either that the mobile robot is already standing on the node, or that the mobile robot is in the node's deviation range. As such, the first node shall not be reported in the `nodeStates`.

Nodes and edges both have a boolean attribute `released`.
If a node or edge is released, the mobile robot is expected to traverse it.
If a node or edge is not released, the mobile robot shall not traverse it.

> The node with `sequenceId` 0 shall always be released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Redundant

To support traffic management, fleet control can split the path communicated via order into two parts:

- *"Base"*: This is the defined route that the mobile robot is allowed to travel. All nodes and edges of the base route have already been released by the fleet control for the mobile robot. The last node of the base is called decision point.
- *"Horizon"*: This is the route currently planned by fleet control for the mobile robot to travel after the decision point. The horizon route has not yet been released by the fleet control.

The mobile robot shall stop at the decision point if no further nodes and edges are added to the base. In order to ensure a fluent movement, the fleet control should extend the base before the mobile robot reaches the decision point, if the traffic situation allows for it.

Since MQTT is an asynchronous protocol and transmission via wireless networks is not reliable, the base cannot be changed. The fleet control shall therefore assume that the base has already been executed by the mobile robot. A later section describes a procedure to cancel an order, but this is also considered unreliable due to the communication limitations mentioned above.

> The fleet control has the possibility to change the horizon by sending an updated route to the mobile robot which includes the changed list of nodes and edges. The procedure for changing the horizon route is shown in Figure 4.

Reviewer 2: For me, the horizon is not changed, it is merely expanded. 
```suggestion
The fleet control has the possibility to change the horizon by sending an updated route to the mobile robot which includes the adapted list of nodes and edges. The procedure for expanding the horizon route is shown in Figure 4.
```

> ![Figure 4 Procedure for changing the driving route "Horizon"](./assets/driving_route_horizon.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Figure 4 Procedure for expanding the driving route "Horizon"](./assets/driving_route_horizon.png)
```

Master control receives requests from the state topic and shall answer via the response topic containing a respone object that includes:
	- The requestId of the corresponding request,
	- a decision with one of the values 'GRANTED', 'QUEUED', 'REJECTED', or 'REVOKED', and
	- optionally a leaseExpiry timestamp that limits the validity of a 'GRANTED' decision.

If a request is answered with 'QUEUED', master control acknowledges reception of the request but does not yet grant permission. The mobile robot shall then continue to wait and shall not perform the requested operation. If a request is answered with 'REJECTED', the mobile robot shall not perform the requested operation and may remove the corresponding request object from its state when it is no longer needed.

If a request is answered with 'GRANTED', the mobile robot is allowed to perform the requested operation in accordance with the semantics of the request type. If a leaseExpiry is present, the permission shall only be considered valid until this time. Master control can extend a lease by sending an updated response with the same requestId and a new leaseExpiry.

> If a request is answered with 'REVOKED', or if the leaseExpiry is reached, the mobile robot shall update the requestStatus accordingly ('REVOKED' or 'EXPIRED') and shall act according to the releaseLossBehavior.

Reviewer 2: EXPIRED is not defined as valid for the ENUM in 6.9.3, should be removed here.

```
>Figure 5 Pseudocode of an order.

> At a later point in time, the order is updated by sending an extension of the order (see pseudocode in Figure 6).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a later point in time, the order is extended by sending an order update (see pseudocode in Figure 6).
```

>Figure 6 Pseudocode of an order update. Note the change of the `orderUpdateId`.

This also aids in the event that an order update is lost (e.g., due to an unreliable wireless network).
The mobile robot can always check that the last known base node has the same `nodeId` (and `sequenceId`) as the first node of a new order update.

Also note that node g is the only base node that is sent again.
Since the base cannot be changed, a retransmission of nodes f and d is not valid.

![Figure 7 Regular update process - order extension](./assets/update_order_extension.png)
>Figure 7 - Regular update process - order extension.

Figure 7 describes how an order should be extended.
It shows the information that is currently available on the mobile robot.
The `orderId` stays the same and the `orderUpdateId` is incremented.

The last node of the previous base is the first base node in the updated order.
With this node the mobile robot can add the updated order onto the current order (stitching).
The other nodes and edges from the previous base are not resent.

> It is important that the contents of the decision point (node g in Figure 7) are not changed. This means actions, deviation range, etc, have to be resent (see Figure 8, `orderUpdateId` 1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important that the contents of the decision point (node g in Figure 7) are not changed. This means actions, deviation range, etc., shall be resent (see Figure 8, `orderUpdateId` 1).
```

Note that for this purpose the mobile robot shall be able to process a logical edge connecting a graph node to itself.

![Figure 8 Order update with additional stitching node.](./assets/update_order_stitching_node.png)
>Figure 8 - Order update with additional stitching node (e.g., to execute new actions on decision point)

Fleet control has the option to make changes to the horizon by sending entirely different nodes as the new base.
The horizon can also be deleted.

To allow loops in orders (like going from node a to b and then back to a) a `sequenceId` is assigned to the node and edge objects.

> This `sequenceId` runs over the nodes and edges (first node of an order receives a 0, the first edge then gets the 1, the second node then gets the 2, and so on).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `sequenceId` runs over the nodes and edges (first node of an order receives a 0, the first edge then gets the 1, the second node then gets the 2, and so forth).
```

In case of a mobile robot that can stop in between nodes, the choice is up to fleet control how the next order should be started.
The mobile robot shall accept both methods.

There are two options:

- Send an order, where the first node is a temporary node that is positioned where the mobile robot currently stands. The mobile robot shall then realize that this node is trivially reachable and accept the order.
- Send an order, where the first node is the last traversed node of the previous order but set the deviation range so large that the mobile robot is within this range. Thus, the mobile robot shall realize that this node shall be counted as traversed and accept the order.

#### 6.1.3.2 Receiving a cancelOrder action when mobile robot is idle

If the mobile robot receives a `cancelOrder` action but the mobile robot is currently idle, or the previous order was canceled, or the `orderId` specified in the action does not match the `orderId` of the mobile robot’s currently active order, the `cancelOrder` action shall be reported as 'FAILED'.

> The mobile robot shall report an error of type "NO_ORDER_TO_CANCEL" with the level set to 'WARNING'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mobile robot shall report an error of type 'NO_ORDER_TO_CANCEL' with the level set to 'WARNING'.
```

***actionParameters [actionParameter]*** | | array | Array of actionParameter objects for the indicated action, e.g., "deviceId", "loadId", "external triggers". <br><br> An example implementation can be found in [7.3.1 Format of action parameters]((#731-format-of-action-parameters)).
*retriable* <br> } | | boolean | "true": action can enter RETRIABLE state if it fails.<br>"false": action enters FAILED state directly after it fails.<br>Default: "false".

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**edge** { | | JSON object | Directional connection between two nodes.
edgeId | | string | Unique edge identification.
sequenceId | | uint32 | Number to track the sequence of nodes and edges in an order and to simplify order updates. <br>The variable sequenceId runs across all nodes and edges of the same order and is reset when a new orderId is issued.
*edgeDescriptor* | | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes.
released | | boolean | "true" indicates that the edge is part of the base.<br>"false" indicates that the edge is part of the horizon. 

> startNodeId | | string | Node defining the origin of the edge.

Reviewer 3: Is this a necessary or more of a cosmetic change?

*deviationRange* | m | float64 | Value for the deviation range of the position in meters.<br>Only for logging and visualization purposes.
x | m | float64 | X-position on the map in reference to the project-specific coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.
y | m | float64 | Y-position on the map in reference to the project-specific coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.
theta | | float64 | Range: [-Pi ... Pi]<br><br>Orientation of the mobile robot.
mapId | | string | Unique identification of the map in which the position is referenced.<br><br>Each map has the same origin of coordinates.<br>When a mobile robot uses an elevator from a departure floor to a destination floor, it leaves the map of the departure floor and spawns on the corresponding elevator node on the map of the destination floor.

> *mapDescriptor*<br>} | | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes.

Reviewer 4: Do we really need the map descriptor in the position object? Doesn't it make more sense in the map object, where the old "description" was removed?

| COORDINATED_REPLANNING | none | | No autonomous replanning is allowed within this zone. Mobile robots are only allowed adjusting their path if granted permission by fleet control. | 
| SPEED_LIMIT | | | Mobile robots must not drive faster than the defined maximum speed within this zone. | 

> | | maximumSpeed | float64 | Maximum permitted speed for mobile robot within the zone in m/s. The speed limit shall already be reached upon entering the zone.|

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| | maximumLinearSpeed | float64 | Maximum permitted speed for mobile robot within the zone in m/s. The speed limit shall already be reached upon entering the zone.|
| | maximumRotationSpeed | float64 | Maximum permitted rotation speed for mobile robot within the zone in m/s. The speed limit shall already be reached upon entering the zone.|

```

factsheetRequest | - | - | - | The factsheet has been communicated | - | -
updateCertificate | - | Mobile robot is downloading and installing certificates | - | Certificates are downloaded, installed and active. | Download or installation failed. | -

>Table 5 - Expected behavior in action states of predefined actions

#### 6.2.3.3 Update mobile robot certificate

For security reasons, mobile robot communication (at least for fleet management) should be secured. Typically, communication to the MQTT broker is secured via TLS, which requires one or more root certificates and a mobile robot-specific key pair. The parameter `service` specifies the service (e.g., 'MQTT') for which the certificates are to be used. The parameter `certificateAuthorityDownloadLink ` specifies the URL for the root certificate(s). The parameters `certificateDownloadLink` and `keyDownloadLink` specify the URLs for the mobile robot-specific public and private keys.

> It is recommended to secure the download via TLS as well, since the sender of the instantAction cannot be verified. It is also advisable to validate the certificate chain before it is activated.

Reviewer: Proposal: mandate this as receiving the certificate unencrypted defeats it's purpose
```suggestion
The download shall be secured via TLS as well, since the sender of the instantAction cannot be verified. It is also advisable to validate the certificate chain before it is activated.
```

In order to minimize downtime and make it easier for the fleet control to synchronize the activation of new maps, it is essential that maps are pre-loaded or buffered on the mobile robots. The status of the maps on the mobile robot can be accessed via the mobile robot state channel. It's important to note that transferring a map to an mobile robot and then activating the map are different processes. To activate a pre-loaded map on a mobile robot, the fleet control sends an instant action. In this case, any other map with the same map identifier but a different map version is automatically disabled. Maps can be deleted by the fleet control with another instant action. The result of this process is shown in the mobile robot state.

The map distribution process is shown in Figure 13.

![Figure 13 Map distribution process](./assets/map_distribution_process.png)
>Figure 13 - Communication required between fleet control, mobile robot and map server to download, enable, and delete a map.

### 6.3.2 Maps in the mobile robot state

> The `mapId` field in the `mobileRobotPosition` of the state represents the currently active map. Information about the maps available on a mobile robot is presented in the `maps` array, which is a component of the state message. Each entry in this array is a JSON object consisting of the mandatory fields `mapId`, `mapVersion`, and `mapStatus`, which can be either 'ENABLED' or 'DISABLED'. An 'ENABLED' map can be used by the mobile robot if necessary. A 'DISABLED' map shall not be used. The status of the download process is indicated by the current action not being completed. Errors are also reported in the state.

Reviewer 6: `The mapId field in the mobileRobotPosition of the state represents the currently active map.`
I am wondering how the **active** map is intended to be selected/switched. Maybe this needs some further explanation in the document.

After successfully deleting a map, it is important to remove that map's entry from the mobile robot's array of maps in the mobile robot state.

## 6.4 Zones

Zones are used to define rules for specific areas of the mobile robot workspace. In this way, zones allow mobile robots to navigate freely between nodes while giving the fleet control the ability to manage traffic. Zones can be used to locally deny mobile robots access to areas or to link access to conditions (zone types: 'BLOCKED' and 'RELEASE'). It is also possible to enforce specific behavior while within the zone (zone types: 'LINE_GUIDED', 'SPEED_LIMIT', 'COORDINATED_REPLANNING', and 'ACTION') or influence the driving behavior by incentivizing or penalizing certain areas (zone types: 'PRIORITY' and 'PENALTY') or giving a predefined driving direction (zone types: 'DIRECTED', 'BIDIRECTED'). The zone types are defined in the following sections.

> Potential conflicts in orders due to overlapping of zones or combination of zone and edge properties and how to resolve them are addressed in section [6.4.4 Interaction between zones](#644-interactions-between-zones).

Reviewer 3: Issue #526

| DIRECTED | | | Mobile robots shall traverse this zone in a specific direction of travel. | 
| | direction | float64 | Preferred direction of travel within the zone in radians. The direction of travel is the angular orientation of the mobile robot's velocity vector in the project-specific coordinate system. |
| | directedLimitation | string | Enum {'SOFT','RESTRICTED','STRICT'}<\br>SOFT: Mobile robots may deviate from the defined direction of travel, but should avoid it, RESTRICTED: The mobile robot may deviate from the defined direction of travel, e.g., to avoid an obstacle, but shall never traverse opposite to the defined direction of travel, STRICT: The mobile robot shall maintain the defined direction of travel as precisely as its technical capabilities allow. |
| BIDIRECTED | | | While in this zone, mobile robots shall only move in the defined direction of travel and its direct opposite (+ Pi), mobile robots should not cross this zone in any other direction. | 
 | direction | float64 | Preferred direction of travel within the zone in radians. The direction of travel is the angular orientation of the mobile robot's velocity vector in the project-specific coordinate system.|

> | | bidirectedLimitation | string | Enum {'SOFT', 'RESTRICTED'}<\br>SOFT: Mobile robots may deviate from the defined directions of travel, but should avoid it, RESTRICTED: The mobile robot should not traverse in any other direction than the directions of travel, except for obstacle avoidance.|

Reviewer: Should this should be shall?
```suggestion
| | bidirectedLimitation | string | Enum {'SOFT', 'RESTRICTED'}<\br>SOFT: Mobile robots may deviate from the defined directions of travel, but should avoid it, RESTRICTED: The mobile robot shall not traverse in any other direction than the directions of travel, except for obstacle avoidance. |
```

Each response has a `responseType` that is either 'GRANTED', 'QUEUED', 'REVOKED', or 'REJECTED'.
If the `responseType` is 'GRANTED', the mobile robot is allowed to enter the zone or use the requested trajectory.
Fleet control can set the `responseType` to 'QUEUED' to acknowledge the mobile robot's request without giving permission, informing the mobile robot that its request is being processed.
If the `responseType` is 'REJECTED', the mobile robot shall not enter the zone or use the requested trajectory.
The `responseType` 'REVOKED' indicates that the permission is no longer valid. The fleet control shall assume a 'REVOKED' request as still being 'GRANTED', until the `requestStatus` of the mobile robot is set to 'REVOKED'.
The `zoneResponse` object can include a `leaseExpiry` which specifies until when a 'GRANTED' request is valid. To extend the `leaseExpiry` fleet control can resend a response message with an updated `leaseExpiry` time.

The mobile robot keeps the requests for as long as it consideres thie information relevant.

The mobile robot shall acknowledge the fleet controls response by setting the `requestStatus` accordingly.

> The interaction between the mobile robot and the fleet control for 'RELEASE' zones shall be according to Figure 15.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interaction between the mobile robot and the fleet control for 'RELEASE' zones shall be according to Figure 16.
```

If the edge attribute `corridor` of the subsequent edge is set, these boundaries should be met additionally.

In case the mobile robot is located too far away from the first node of an order, the fleet control can add an extended `allowedDeviationXY` to this node to include the mobile robot's current position.

The mobile robot reports the traversal of a node by removing its `nodeState` from the `nodeStates` array and setting the `lastNodeId`, `lastNodeSequenceId` to the traversed node's values.

As soon as the mobile robot reports the node as traversed, the mobile robot shall trigger the actions associated with the node, if any.
The traversal of a node also necessarily implies leaving the edge that is leading up to the node.
The edge shall then also be removed from the `edgeStates` and the actions that were active on the edge shall be finished.

The traversal of the node also marks the moment when the mobile robot enters the following edge, if there is one.
The edge's actions shall be triggered, if any.

> An exception to this rule is if the mobile robot shall pause on the node (because of a soft or hard blocking action, or otherwise) – then the mobile robot only enters the following edge once it begins driving again.

Reviewer: If we are already on this line, we should not call it "pause" here as I think it is not intended that the robot is reporting "paused: true" every time it is executing hard blocking actions
```suggestion
An exception to this rule is if the mobile robot shall stop on the node (because of a soft or hard blocking action) – then the mobile robot only enters the following edge once it begins driving again.
```

![Figure 19 Depiction of nodeStates, edgeStates, and actionStates during order handling](./assets/states_during_order_handling.png)
>Figure 19 - Depiction of `nodeStates`, `edgeStates`, and `actionStates` during order handling

#### 6.6.2.1 Definition of allowedDeviationXY as an ellipse

The allowedDeviationXY is defined as an ellipse around the node position to allow more flexible approaches to the node.

![Figure 20 allowedDeviationXY ellipse](./assets/ellipse.png)
>Figure 20 - allowedDeviation ellipse

> A fleet control system which doesn't support internally ellipses can choose `a` = `b` and `theta` = 0.0 to define a circle. A mobile robot which doesn't support internally ellipses can choose the smaller half axis as a circle radius and ignore `theta` and behaves still standard conform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fleet control system which does not support ellipses can choose `a` = `b` and `theta` = 0.0 to define a circle. A mobile robot which does not support ellipses can choose the smaller half axis as a circle radius and ignore `theta` and behaves still standard conform.
```

The mobile robot's state shall always represent the full status of the order it currently has. Therefore, the robot shall report both the `actionsStates` of actions included in its base as well as horizon at all times. All horizon actions are reported as 'WAITING'. If the mobile robot receives an order update where part of its former horizon is removed or changed, all actions that were attached to these nodes and edges shall be removed from the `actionStates` to reflect this. `actionStates` of base actions shall never be removed in the context of an `orderUpdate` as the base cannot be modified once released.

### 6.6.10 Request Use of Corridors

If the corridors within a mobile robot's currently active order have the `releaseRequired` flag set to true, it shall issue a request prior to deviating from the predefined trajectory of an edge. For this purpose, the robot shall add an `edgeRequest` object to its state message. Note that the `requestId` shall be unique across all requests (e.g. `zoneRequest`, `edgeRequest`) issued by the mobile robot. Fleet control shall only release the corridor for edges that are part of the base.

> The `requestStatus` is set to REQUESTED and the combination of `edgeId` and `sequenceId` references the edge's trajectory the robot asks to deviate from. The mobile robot has the option to request the approval for several edges simulatenously as long as they are part of its current base. The usage of each corridor shall be requested in a dedicated `edgeRequest` and each request must be approved inidivdually by fleet control. 

Reviewer: Proposal: refer to 6.9
```suggestion
The `requestStatus` is set to REQUESTED and the combination of `edgeId` and `sequenceId` references the edge's trajectory the robot asks to deviate from. The mobile robot has the option to request the approval for several edges simulatenously as long as they are part of its current base. The usage of each corridor shall be requested in a dedicated `edgeRequest` and each request must be approved inidivdually by fleet control via `response` topic (see Section [6.9 Request/response mechanism](#69-requestresponse-mechanism)).
```

A request is always initiated by the mobile robot and communicated as part of the state message. The fleet control evaluates the request and returns its decision via the response topic.

Each request is represented on the mobile robot by a request object (e.g. zoneRequest) which is included in the state message. The request object shall contain at minimum:

	- a `requestId` that is unique per mobile robot for all currently active requests,
	- a `requestType` that specifies the kind of operation the request refers to (access, replanning, use of corridor),
	- a reference to the resource the request addresses (e.g. zone, zone set, map, edgeId, sequenceId), and
	- a `requestStatus`.

The field `requestStatus` describes the life cycle of the request and shall support the following values:
- 'REQUESTED': Mobile robot states a request.
- 'GRANTED': The fleet control grants the request.
- 'REVOKED': Fleet control revokes previously granted request. 
- 'EXPIRED': request has expired. 
- 'QUEUED': Acknowledge the mobile robot's request to the fleet control, but no permission is given yet. Request was added to some sort of a queue.

> Fleet control receives requests from the state topic and shall answer via the response topic containing a respone object that includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fleet control receives requests from the state topic and shall answer via the response topic containing a response object that includes:
```

- The `requestId` of the corresponding request,
- a decision with one of the values 'GRANTED', 'QUEUED', 'REJECTED', or 'REVOKED', and
- optionally a `leaseExpiry` timestamp that limits the validity of a 'GRANTED' decision.

If a request is answered with 'QUEUED', fleet control acknowledges reception of the request but does not yet grant permission. The mobile robot shall then continue to wait and shall not perform the requested operation. If a request is answered with 'REJECTED', the mobile robot shall not perform the requested operation and may remove the corresponding request object from its state when it is no longer needed.

If a request is answered with 'GRANTED', the mobile robot is allowed to perform the requested operation in accordance with the semantics of the request type. If a `leaseExpiry` is present, the permission shall only be considered valid until this time. Fleet control can extend a lease by sending an updated response with the same `requestId` and a new `leaseExpiry`.

> If a request is answered with 'REVOKED', or if the `leaseExpiry` is reached, the mobile robot shall update the `requestStatus` accordingly ('REVOKED' or 'EXPIRED') and shall act according to the `releaseLossBehavior` and shall keep the request in its state until the zone is exited. If the zone was not entered, the vehicle shall remove the request from its state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a request is answered with 'REVOKED', or if the `leaseExpiry` is reached, the mobile robot shall update the `requestStatus` accordingly ('REVOKED' or 'EXPIRED') and shall act according to the `releaseLossBehavior` and shall keep the request in its state until the zone is exited. If the zone was not entered, the mobile robot shall remove the request from its state.
```

If no response is received within the time frame required by the application, the mobile robot shall behave as if the request had not been granted and shall not perform the operation that requires explicit permission. The handling of timeouts and retries shall be defined during integration.

A request shall be removed from the mobile robot’s state once the corresponding operation has been completed, aborted, or rejected and no further decision from fleet control is required.

> ### 6.9.1 Response for edge requests

Reviewer: Could we remove this chapter and try to keep the description of 6.9 agnostic of the request context?

> stopHibernation | startHibernation | Ends hibernate mode. To initiate wake‑up while the mobile robot is in the HIBERNATING state, a control device (onboard or external) shall subscribe to the instantAction topic and remain connected to the MQTT broker. Because the mobile robots standard control device may be partially shut down during hibernation, the wake‑up may be triggered by a distinct MQTT client (separate from the mobile robots usual communication client).<br>Upon success, the mobile robot shall publish the connection state ONLINE.<br>Driving and actions may be immediately resumed, dependent on the mobile robot's orderHandling.clearOrderOnStopHibernation value. | yes | clearOrderOnStopHibernation (boolean) | - | yes | no | no

Reviewer 2: What's the "orderHandling.clearOrderOnStopHibernation" isn't is simply defined as an actionParameter?

shutdown | - | Initiates a coordinated shutdown of the mobile robot, where it disconnects from the MQTT broker and clears all orders. Action execution requires the mobile robot to be in an idle state. There is no way using the VDA 5050 protocol to automatically restart due to the connection being terminated.<br>If a mobile robot is in hibernate mode but should be shut down, it must first exit hibernation (via stopHibernation) before executing shutdown.| yes | - | - | yes | no | no
startCharging | stopCharging | Activates the charging process. <br>Charging can be done on a charging spot (mobile robot stopped) or on a charging lane (while driving). <br>Protection against overcharging is the responsibility of the mobile robot. | yes | - | .batteryState.charging | yes | yes | no
stopCharging | startCharging | Discontinues the charging process to send a new order. <br>The charging process can also be interrupted by the mobile robot or the charging station, e.g., if the battery is full. <br>The battery state is only allowed to be "false", when the mobile robot is ready to receive orders. | yes | - |.batteryState.charging | yes | yes | no

> initializePosition | - | Resets (overrides) the pose of the mobile robot with the given parameters. | yes | x (float64)<br>y (float64)<br>theta (float64)<br>mapId (string)<br>lastNodeId (string) | .mobileRobotPosition.x<br>.mobileRobotPosition.y<br>.mobileRobotPosition.theta<br>.mobileRobotPosition.mapId<br>.lastNodeId<br>.maps | yes | yes<br>(Elevator) | no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
startCharging | stopCharging | Activates the charging process. <br>Charging can be done on a charging spot (mobile robot stopped) or on a charging lane (while driving). <br>Protection against overcharging is the responsibility of the mobile robot. | yes | - | batteryState.charging | yes | yes | no
stopCharging | startCharging | Discontinues the charging process to send a new order. <br>The charging process can also be interrupted by the mobile robot or the charging station, e.g., if the battery is full. <br>The battery state is only allowed to be "false", when the mobile robot is ready to receive orders. | yes | - | batteryState.charging | yes | yes | no
initializePosition | - | Resets (overrides) the pose of the mobile robot with the given parameters. | yes | x (float64)<br>y (float64)<br>theta (float64)<br>mapId (string)<br>lastNodeId (string) | mobileRobotPosition.x<br>mobileRobotPosition.y<br>mobileRobotPosition.theta<br>mobileRobotPosition.mapId<br>lastNodeId<br>.maps | yes | yes<br>(Elevator) | no
```

factsheetRequest | - | Requests the mobile robot to send a factsheet | yes | - | - | yes | no | no
updateCertificate | - | Request the mobile robot to download and activate a new certificate set, the service parameter is an extensible enum with the predefined parameter 'MQTT' to be used for mqtt connection.  | yes | service (string)<br>keyDownloadLink (string)<br>certificateDownloadLink (string)<br>certificateAuthorityDownloadLink (string, optional) | - | yes | no | no |

#### 6.2.3.2 Action states

action | action states
---|:---:
 | | 'INITIALIZING', 'RUNNING', 'PAUSED', 'FINISHED', 'FAILED' |

action | 'INITIALIZING' | 'RUNNING' | 'PAUSED' | 'FINISHED' | 'FAILED'
---|---|---|---|---|---
startPause | - | Activation of the mode is in preparation.<br>If the mobile robot supports an instant transition, this state can be omitted. | - | Mobile robot stands still. <br>All pauseable actions are paused. <br>The pause mode is activated. <br>The mobile robot reports .paused: "true". | The pause mode cannot be activated for some reason (e.g., overridden by hardware switch).

> stopPause | - | Deactivation of the mode is in preparation. <br>If the mobile robot supports an instant transition, this state can be omitted. | - | The pause mode is deactivated. <br>All paused actions are resumed. <br>The mobile robot reports .paused: "false". | The pause mode cannot be deactivated for some reason (e.g., overridden by hardware switch).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
startPause | - | Activation of the mode is in preparation.<br>If the mobile robot supports an instant transition, this state can be omitted. | - | Mobile robot stands still. <br>All pauseable actions are paused. <br>The pause mode is activated. <br>The mobile robot reports paused: "true". | The pause mode cannot be activated for some reason (e.g., overridden by hardware switch).
stopPause | - | Deactivation of the mode is in preparation. <br>If the mobile robot supports an instant transition, this state can be omitted. | - | The pause mode is deactivated. <br>All paused actions are resumed. <br>The mobile robot reports paused: "false". | The pause mode cannot be deactivated for some reason (e.g., overridden by hardware switch).
```

For the differentiation between different levels of a site or location, a unique `mapId` is used.
The map coordinate system is to be specified as a right-handed coordinate system with the z-axis pointing skywards.
A positive rotation therefore is to be understood as a counterclockwise rotation.
The mobile robot coordinate system is also specified as a right-handed coordinate system (ISO 9787 4.1) with the x-axis pointing in the forward direction of the mobile robot and the z-axis pointing upward (ISO 9787 5.5). The mobile robot reference point is defined as (0,0,0) in the mobile robot reference frame, unless specified otherwise.

![Figure 12 Coordinate system with sample mobile robot and orientation](./assets/coordinate_system_vehicle_orientation.png)
>Figure 12 - Coordinate system with sample mobile robot and orientation

The X, Y, and Z coordinates shall be given in meters. 

> The orientation shall be in radians and shall be within +Pi and –Pi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The orientation shall be in radians and shall be within -Pi and +Pi.
```

Potential conflicts in orders due to overlapping of zones or combination of zone and edge properties and how to resolve them are addressed in section [6.3.4 Interaction between zones](#634-interactions-between-zones).
Some mobile robots cannot process zones at all, while other mobile robots might only be able to work with a certain subset of zone types, such as 'BLOCKED'. All mobile robots must therefore report to fleet control which zones they are able to understand by adding the according zone names to the `supportedZones` array under `typeSpecifications` in their factsheet.
Also (virtually) line-guided mobile robots can choose to support zone-based navigation if they can implement the logic of the corresponding zone types defined in the following. 
A zone set shall only be changed and distributed by fleet control to keep consistency in the system.

### 6.4.1 Zone types

Two categories of zones are distinguished: contour-based zones and kinematic center-based zones. This distinction is based on the different conditions for when the mobile robot is considered to be entering and exiting zones.

> #### Contour-based zones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 6.4.1.1 Contour-based zones
```

| **Zone Type**| **Zone Parameters** | **Data type** | **Description** | 
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BLOCKED | none | | Mobile robots shall not enter this zone. If a mobile robot has entered the zone or finds itself within one, it shall stop and throw an 'BLOCKED_ZONE_VIOLATION' error with level set to 'CRITICAL'.| 
| LINE_GUIDED | none | | No free navigation is allowed in this zone, mobile robots shall follow the predefined trajectories on edges. Mobile robots may only enter this zone if the route is explicitly specified by the fleet control in the form of a node-edge graph. Any movement of the mobile robot that requires it to enter this zone shall follow a predefined trajectory. When entering the zone, the mobile robot shall be on the trajectory of the edge that crosses the zone. The edges that enter and are inside the line-guided zone require a trajectory sent from the fleet control or a predefined trajectory on the mobile robot. A corridor can be sent to allow the mobile robot to deviate from the trajectory. | 
| RELEASE | | - | Mobile robots are only allowed entering this zone once they have been granted access through fleet control. | 

> | | releaseLossBehavior | string | Enum {'STOP', 'CONTINUE', 'EVACUATE'}</br>When the access to this zone is revoked or expired, the mobile robot can either STOP, CONTINUE, or EVACUATE the zone. This action is only executed, when the mobile robot is already in the zone and the release expires or is revoked. If not defined, the mobile robot is expected to STOP and report an error. STOP: Mobile robot stops and sends a RELEASE_LOST error with level CRITICAL. EVACUATE: Execute the evacuation behavior of the mobile robot to leave the zone, keeping the `zoneRequest` object granting release in its state until the zone is left. CONTINUE: If the release is revoked or expires after the mobile robot has already entered the zone, the mobile robot continues its path, keeping the zoneRequest object granting the zone release in its state. If the order ends inside the zone, the mobile robot waits for a new order.| 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| | releaseLossBehavior | string | Enum {'STOP', 'CONTINUE', 'EVACUATE'}</br>When the access to this zone is revoked or expired, the mobile robot can either STOP, CONTINUE, or EVACUATE the zone. This action is only executed, when the mobile robot is already in the zone and the release expires or is revoked. If not defined, the mobile robot is expected to STOP and report an error. STOP: Mobile robot stops and sends an error of type 'RELEASE_LOST' with level 'CRITICAL'. EVACUATE: Execute the evacuation behavior of the mobile robot to leave the zone, keeping the `zoneRequest` object granting release in its state until the zone is left. CONTINUE: If the release is revoked or expires after the mobile robot has already entered the zone, the mobile robot continues its path, keeping the zoneRequest object granting the zone release in its state. If the order ends inside the zone, the mobile robot waits for a new order.| 
```

**RELEASE**||No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict|No Conflict
**LINE_GUIDED**|||No conflict|LINE_GUIDED|No Conflict| (1) |LINE_GUIDED|LINE_GUIDED|LINE_GUIDED|No conflict|LINE_GUIDED|No conflict
**COORDINATED_REPLANNING**||||(2)|No conflict|(1)|No conflict|No conflict|No conflict|No conflict|COORDINATED_REPLANNING|(3)
**SPEED_LIMIT** |||||(4)|No conflict|No conflict|No conflict|No conflict|No conflict|SPEED_LIMIT|(4)
**ACTION** ||||||(5)|No conflict|No conflict|No conflict|No conflict|ACTION|(5)
**PRIORITY** |||||||(6)|(6)|No conflict|No conflict|(7)|No conflict
**PENALTY** ||||||||(6)|No conflict|No conflict|(7)|No conflict
**DIRECTED** |||||||||(8)|(8)|(7)|(9)
**BIDIRECTED** ||||||||||(8)|(7)|(9)

1) If actions would conflict with other zones' behavior, report a 'ZONE_ACTION_CONFLICT' error with level 'CRITICAL' (order error) and stop the mobile robot.
2) Planned trajectory must be granted for all 'COORDINATED_REPLANNING' zones.
3) If a trajectory is predefined for the edge, it shall be sent in the zone request.
4) The lowest of the competing speeds applies.
5) Execute all actions

> 6) The most restrictive one is always selected here; for PRIORITY zones, the lowest priority factor is used; for overlapping PRIORITY and PENALTY zones, the highest penalty factor is used; for overlapping PENALTY zones, the highest penalty factor is used.

Reviewer: "for overlapping PRIORITY and PENALTY zones, the highest penalty factor is used"

just to be sure: the highest penalty is correct here, not the highest value of all penalty and priority factors?

Reviewer 3: Issue #527 created

### 6.4.5 Error handling within zones

If at any point of the order execution, a mobile robot realizes, that it can not reach a node in its order, it shall report a 'NODE_UNREACHABLE' error with level 'CRITICAL' to the fleet control. The fleet control shall then decide how to proceed. The mobile robot shall not try to reach the node again, but wait for further instructions from the fleet control.

## 6.5 Connection

During the connection of a mobile robot client to the broker, a last will topic and message can be set, which is published by the broker upon disconnection of the mobile robot client from the broker.
Thus, the fleet control can detect a disconnection event by subscribing the connection topics of all mobile robots.
The disconnection is detected via a heartbeat that is exchanged between the broker and the client.
The interval is configurable in most brokers and should be set around 15 seconds.
The Quality of Service level for the `connection` topic shall be 1 - At Least Once.

The last will message will not be sent, when a connection is ended in a graceful way by using an MQTT disconnection command.

> The last will message is only sent by the broker, if the connection is unexpectedly interrupted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last will message will not be sent when a connection is ended in a graceful way by using an MQTT disconnection command.
The last will message is only sent by the broker if the connection is unexpectedly interrupted.
```

Mobile robot comes online:

1. Set the last will to "uagv/v3/manufacturer/serialNumber/connection" with the field `connectionState` set to `CONNECTIONBROKEN`, when the MQTT connection is created.
2. Send the topic "uagv/v3/manufacturer/serialNumber/connection" with `connectionState` set to `ONLINE`.

All messages on this topic shall be sent with a retained flag.

When connection between the mobile robot and the broker stops unexpectedly, the broker will send the last will topic: "uagv/v3/manufacturer/serialNumber/connection" with the field `connectionState` set to `CONNECTIONBROKEN`.

## 6.6 State

The mobile robot state will be transmitted on only one topic.
Compared to separate messages (e.g., for orders, battery state and errors) using one topic will reduce the workload of the broker and the fleet control for handling messages, while also keeping the information about the mobile robot state synchronized.

The mobile robot state message will be published with occurrence of relevant events or at the latest every 30s via MQTT broker to fleet control.

Events that trigger the transmission of the state message are:
- Receiving an order
- Receiving an order update

> - Changes in the load status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Changes in the `load` object
```

- Change in the `safetyState` object
- Change in the `newBaseRequest` field
- Change in the `lastNodeId` or `lastNodeSequenceId` field
- Change in the `zoneRequests` field
- Change in the `batteryState.charging` field
- Change in the `nodeStates` or `edgeStates` arrays
- Change in the `actionStates`, `instantActionStates` or `zoneActionStates` arrays
- Change in the `zoneSets` array
- Change in the `maps` array

There should be an effort to curb the amount of communication.
If two events correlate with each other (e.g., the receiving of a new order usually forces an update of the `nodeStates` and `edgeStates`; as does the driving over a node), it is sensible to trigger one state update instead of multiple. The minimum time between two consecutive state messages is defined by the factsheet ([7.10 Implementation of the factsheet message](#710-implementation-of-the-factsheet-message) protocolLimits.timing.minimumStateInterval) . 

### 6.6.1 Concept and logic

The order progress is tracked by the `nodeStates` and `edgeStates`.
Additionally, if the mobile robot is able to derive its current position, it can publish its position via the `position` field.

> If the mobile robot plans the path by itself, it shall communicate its calculated trajectory (including base and horizon) in the form of NURBS via the `trajectory` object in the state message, unless fleet control cannot use this field, and it was agreed during integration, that this field shall not be sent.

Reviewer 2: I think we might want to remove this paragraph entirely? 
The robot shall communicate it's planned trajectory in the `plannedPath` and `intermediatePath`.

It is up to the mobile robot to decide how long it reports information via an information message.

The fleet control shall not use the info messages for logic; they shall only be used for visualization and debugging purposes.

### 6.6.5 Errors

The mobile robot reports issues that it wants to inform the operator about via the `errors` array.
The issues can have four levels: 'WARNING', 'URGENT', 'CRITICAL', and 'FATAL'.

- A 'WARNING' level issue does not require immediate attention. The mobile robot can continue its current order and take new orders. The error might be self-resolving, e.g., a dirty LiDar-scanner.
- An 'URGENT' level issue requires immediate attention, e.g., a low battery level. The mobile robot can continue its current order, and is able to take new orders.
- A 'CRITICAL' level issue requires immediate attention, e.g., trying to pick an object, that is not there. The mobile robot can not continue its current order, but is able to take new orders.
- A 'FATAL' level issue requires user intervention, e.g., losing localization. The mobile robot can neither continue its currently active order nor take any new orders.

> The mobile robot can add references that help with finding the cause of the error via the `errorReferences` array as well as `errorHints` to propose a possible resolution. Regardless of the level of the issue, the mobile robot shall never clear its order due to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of the level of the issue, the mobile robot shall never clear its order due to it.
```
ErrorReferences are described below

#### 6.6.5.1 Error references

If an error occurs due to an erroneous order or execution failure, the mobile robot can return meaningful error references in the field `errorReferences` (see Section [7.8 Implementation of the state message](#78-implementation-of-the-state-message)).
This can include the following information:

- `headerId`
- Topic (`order` or `instantAction`)
- `orderId` and `orderUpdateId` if error was caused by an order update
- `actionId` if error was caused by an action
- List of parameters if error was caused by erroneous action parameters

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Additional hints can be put to the `errorHints` array.

```

STARTUP | Fleet control is not in control of the mobile robot. The mobile robot is starting up and not ready to receive orders. State message parameters may be incomplete or invalid until startup is finished.
SERVICE | Fleet control is not in control of the mobile robot. <br>Fleet control shall not send orders or actions to the mobile robot. <br>When the mobile robot enters or leaves this mode, it immediately clears any current order.<br>The mobile robot shall set `lastNodeId` to an empty string ("").<br>Authorized personnel can reconfigure the mobile robot.
TEACH_IN | Fleet control is not in control of the mobile robot. <br>Fleet control shall not send orders or actions to the mobile robot. <br>When the mobile robot enters or leaves this mode, it immediately clears any current order.<br>The mobile robot shall set `lastNodeId` to an empty string ("").<br>The mobile robot is being taught, e.g., mapping is done by an operator.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br>
```

In general: some tables have numbered captions, some have not. Should we add captions to all tables?

### 6.6.8 Idle state of the mobile robot

A mobile robot is idle if its `nodeStates` and `edgeStates` are empty and all order related `actionStates` are either 'FINISHED' or 'FAILED'. A new order shall only be accepted if the mobile robot is idle. An order update can be accepted when the mobile robot is idle or during order execution. When idle, a mobile robot can execute instantActions.

### 6.6.9 Action states

When a mobile robot receives an order related `action` (attached to a `node` or `edge` of an order), it shall report this `action` with an `actionState` in its `actionStates` array.
When a mobile robot receives an `instantAction`, it shall report this `action` with an `actionState` in its `instantActionStates` array.
When a mobile robot executes a `zoneAction`, it shall report this `action` with an `actionState` in its `zoneActionStates` array. Optionally, a mobile robot can report planned `zoneAction` here.

> The current stage of an action is reflected in the field `actionStatus` of an `actionState`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current stage of an action is reflected in the field `actionStatus` of the corresponding `actionState`.
```

If during the avoidance procedure the robot reaches the end of its current edge's `corridor` and wishes to continue to the upcoming corridor, which is not yet released, it must stop at the border of its current `corridor`, send a dedicated edge request, and await its approval through the fleet control. If the robot's approval expires or the fleet control revokes a granted request, it must initiate the fallback action predefined in the `releaseLossBehavior` of the corridor of the edge.

## 6.7 Visualization

For a near real-time position and planned trajectory update the mobile robot can broadcast its position, velocity and planned trajectory on the topic `visualization`.

The fields of the visualization object use the same structure as the position, velocity, planned path and intermediate path object in the state.
For additional information see the [Implementation of the state message](#78-implementation-of-the-state-message) for the mobile robot state.
The update rate for this topic is defined by the integrator.

## 6.8 Sharing of planned paths for freely navigating mobile robots

> Mobile robots shall communicate their planned trajectory to the fleet control system. This is done via the state message. For a higher frequency of sharing, the `visualization` topic can be used.

Reviewer 2: Just to clarify
```suggestion
Freely navigating mobile robots shall communicate their planned trajectory to the fleet control system. This is done via the state message. For a higher frequency of sharing, the `visualization` topic can be used.
```

A request is always initiated by the mobile robot and communicated as part of the state message. The fleet control evaluates the request and returns its decision via the response topic.

Each request is represented on the mobile robot by a request object (e.g. zoneRequest) which is included in the state message. The request object shall contain at minimum:
	- a requestId that is unique per mobile robot for all currently active requests,
	- a requestType that specifies the kind of operation the request refers to (access, replanning, use of corridor),
	- a reference to the resource the request addresses (e.g. zone, zone set, map, edgeId, sequenceId), and
	- a requestStatus.

The field requestStatus describes the life cycle of the request and shall support the following values:
    - 'REQUESTED': Mobile robot request. 
    - 'GRANTED': The fleet control grants the request.
	- 'REVOKED': Fleet control revokes previously granted request. 
	- 'EXPIRED': request has expired. 

> 	- 'QUEUED': Acknowledge the mobile robot's request to the fleet control, but no permission is given yet. Request was added to some sort of a queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The field requestStatus describes the life cycle of the request and shall support the following values:

- 'REQUESTED': Mobile robot request. 
- 'GRANTED': The fleet control grants the request.
- 'REVOKED': Fleet control revokes previously granted request. 
- 'EXPIRED': request has expired. 
- 'QUEUED': Acknowledge the mobile robot's request to the fleet control, but no permission is given yet. Request was added to some sort of a queue.
```

Fleet control receives requests from the state topic and shall answer via the response topic containing a respone object that includes:
	- The requestId of the corresponding request,
	- a decision with one of the values 'GRANTED', 'QUEUED', 'REJECTED', or 'REVOKED', and

> 	- optionally a leaseExpiry timestamp that limits the validity of a 'GRANTED' decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fleet control receives requests from the state topic and shall answer via the response topic containing a respone object that includes:

- the requestId of the corresponding request,
- a decision with one of the values 'GRANTED', 'QUEUED', 'REJECTED', or 'REVOKED', and
- optionally a leaseExpiry timestamp that limits the validity of a 'GRANTED' decision.
```

If a request is answered with 'QUEUED', fleet control acknowledges reception of the request but does not yet grant permission. The mobile robot shall then continue to wait and shall not perform the requested operation. If a request is answered with 'REJECTED', the mobile robot shall not perform the requested operation and may remove the corresponding request object from its state when it is no longer needed.

> If a request is answered with 'GRANTED', the mobile robot is allowed to perform the requested operation in accordance with the semantics of the request type. If a leaseExpiry is present, the permission shall only be considered valid until this time. Fleet control can extend a lease by sending an updated response with the same requestId and a new leaseExpiry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a request is answered with 'GRANTED', the mobile robot is allowed to perform the requested operation in accordance with the semantics of the request type. If a `leaseExpiry` is present, the permission shall only be considered valid until this time. Fleet control can extend a lease by sending an updated response with the same `requestId` and a new `leaseExpiry`.
```

> If a request is answered with 'REVOKED', or if the leaseExpiry is reached, the mobile robot shall update the requestStatus accordingly ('REVOKED' or 'EXPIRED') and shall act according to the releaseLossBehavior and shall keep the request in its state until the zone is exited. If the zone was not entered, the vehicle shall remove the request from its state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a request is answered with 'REVOKED', or if the `leaseExpiry` is reached, the mobile robot shall update the requestStatus accordingly ('REVOKED' or 'EXPIRED') and shall act according to the releaseLossBehavior and shall keep the request in its state until the zone is exited. If the zone was not entered, the vehicle shall remove the request from its state.
```

The different messages are presented in tables describing the contents of the fields of the JSON that is sent as an order, state, etc.

In addition, JSON schemas are available for validation in the public git repository (https://github.com/VDA5050/VDA5050).
The JSON schemas are updated with every release of the VDA5050. If there are differences between the JSON schemas and this document, the variant in this document applies.

## 7.1 Symbols of the tables and meaning of formatting

The table contains the name of the identifier, its unit, its data type, and a description, if any.

Identification | Description
---|---
standard | Variable is an elementary data type
**bold** | Variable is a non-elementary data type (e.g., JSON object or array) and defined separately
*italic* | Variable is optional
***italic and bold***| Variable is optional and a non-elementary data type
arrayName[arrayDataType] | Variable (here arrayName) is an array of the data type included in the square brackets (here the data type is arrayDataType)

All keywords are case sensitive.
All field names are in camelCase.
All enumerations are in UPPERCASE without underscores.

### 7.1.1 Optional fields

> If a variable is marked as optional, it means that it is optional for the sender because the variable might not be applicable in certain cases (e.g., when the fleet control sends an order to a mobile robot, some mobile robots plan their trajectory themselves and the field `trajectory` within the `edge` object of the order can be omitted).

Reviewer 2: Wording
```suggestion
If a variable is marked as optional, it is optional for the sender as the variable might not be applicable in certain cases (e.g., when the fleet control sends an order to a mobile robot, some mobile robots plan their trajectory themselves and the field `trajectory` within the `edge` object of the order can be omitted).
```

**nodes [node]** | | array | Array of node objects to be traversed for fulfilling the order. <br>One node is enough for a valid order. <br>Leave edge array empty in that case.
**edges [edge]** | | array | Array of edge objects to be traversed for fulfilling the order. <br>One node is enough for a valid order. <br>Leave edge array empty in that case.

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**node** { | | JSON object|
nodeId | | string | Unique node identification
sequenceId | | uint32 | Number to track the sequence of nodes and edges in an order and to simplify order updates. <br>The main purpose is to distinguish between a node, which is passed more than once within one orderId. <br>The variable sequenceId runs across all nodes and edges of the same order and is reset when a new orderId is issued.
*nodeDescriptor* | | string | Additional information on the node
released | | boolean | "true" indicates that the node is part of the base. <br> "false" indicates that the node is part of the horizon.
***nodePosition*** | | JSON object | Node position. <br>Optional for mobile robot types that do not require the node position (e.g., line-guided mobile robots).

> **actions [action]** <br> } | | array | Array of actions to be executed on a node. <br>Empty array, if no actions required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br> **actions [action]** <br> } | | array | Array of actions to be executed on a node. <br>Empty array, if no actions required.
```

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---| --- |--- | ---
**nodePosition** { | | JSON object | Defines the position on a map in a global project-specific world coordinate system. <br>Each floor has its own map. <br>All maps shall use the same project-specific global origin.

> x | m | float64 | X-position on the map in reference to the map coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.

Reviewer 2: Should we stick to the wording?
```suggestion
x | m | float64 | X-position on the map in reference to the global project-specific coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.
```

y | m | float64 | Y-position on the map in reference to the map coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.

> *theta* | rad | float64 | Range: [-Pi ... Pi] <br><br>Absolute orientation a mobile robot shall match on a node for it to be considered traversed.<br>If defined, the mobile robot has to assume the theta angle on this node.<br>If previous edge disallows rotation, the mobile robot shall rotate on the node.<br>If following edge has a differing orientation defined but disallows rotation, the mobile robot is to rotate on the node to the edges desired rotation before entering the edge.

Reviewer 2: I don't fully understand this sentence, why is the robot assuming the orientation? Is this badly translated from German ("eine Orientierung annehmen?")

```suggestion
*theta* | rad | float64 | Range: [-Pi ... Pi] <br><br>Absolute orientation a mobile robot shall match on a node for it to be considered traversed.<br>If defined, the mobile robot has to adjust its orientation to the theta angle on this node.<br>If previous edge disallows rotation, the mobile robot shall rotate on the node.<br>If following edge has a differing orientation defined but disallows rotation, the mobile robot is to rotate on the node to the edges desired rotation before entering the edge.
```

*mapDescriptor* <br> } | | string | Additional information on the map.

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---| --- |--- | ---
**allowedDeviationXY** { | | JSON object | Indicates how precisely a mobile robot shall match the position of a node for it to be considered traversed.<br> If `a` = `b`= 0.0: no deviation is allowed, which means the mobile robot shall reach or pass the node position with the mobile robot control point as precisely as is technically possible for the mobile robot. This applies also if `allowedDeviationXY` is smaller than what is technically viable for the mobile robot. If the mobile robot supports this attribute, but it is not defined for this node by fleet control the mobile robot shall assume the value of `a` and `b` as 0.0.<br> The coordinates of the node defines the center of the ellipse.
a | m | float64 | length of the ellipse semi-major axis	in meters.
b | m | float64 | length of the ellipse semi-minor axis in meters.

> theta<br>} | rad | float64 | rotation angle (the angle from the positive horizontal axis to the ellipse's major axis inside the project-specific coordinate system).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br>theta<br>} | rad | float64 | rotation angle (the angle from the positive horizontal axis to the ellipse's major axis inside the project-specific coordinate system).
```

*Remark: A fleet control system which doesn't support internally ellipses can choose `a` = `b` and `theta` = 0.0 to define a circle. A mobile robot which doesn't support internally ellipses can choose the smaller half axis as a circle radius and ignore `theta` and behaves still standard conform.*

![Figure 22 allowedDeviationXY ellipse](./assets/ellipse.png)
>Figure 22 - allowedDeviation ellipse

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**action** { | | JSON object | Describes an action that the mobile robot can perform.
actionType | | string | Name of action as described in the first column of "Actions and Parameters". <br> Identifies the function of the action.

> actionId | | string | Unique ID to identify the action and map them to the actionState in the state. <br>Suggestion: Use UUIDs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
actionId | | string | Unique ID to identify the action and map them to the `actionState` in the state. <br>Suggestion: Use UUIDs.
```

*actionDescriptor* | | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes.

> blockingType | | string | Enum {'NONE', 'SINGLE', 'SOFT', 'HARD'}: <br> 'NONE': allows driving and other actions;<br> 'SINGLE': allows driving and but other actions;<br>'SOFT': allows other actions but not driving;<br>'HARD': is the only allowed action at that time.

Reviewer 2: Superfluous word
```suggestion
blockingType | | string | Enum {'NONE', 'SINGLE', 'SOFT', 'HARD'}: <br> 'NONE': allows driving and other actions;<br> 'SINGLE': allows driving but other actions;<br>'SOFT': allows other actions but not driving;<br>'HARD': is the only allowed action at that time.
```

*reachOrientationBeforeEntering* | | boolean | This parameter is only valid for omni-directional mobile robots. "true": Desired edge orientation shall be reached before entering the edge.<br>"false": Mobile robot can rotate into the desired orientation on the edge.<br>Default: "false".
*maximumRotationSpeed* | rad/s | float64| Maximum rotation speed<br><br>Optional:<br>No limit, if not set.
***trajectory*** | | JSON object | Trajectory JSON object for this edge as NURBS. <br>Defines the path, on which the mobile robot should move between the start node and the end node of the edge.<br><br>Optional:<br>Can be omitted, if the mobile robot cannot process trajectories or if the mobile robot plans its own trajectory.
*length* | m | float64 | Length of the path from the start node to the end node<br><br>Optional:<br>This value is used by line-guided mobile robots to decrease their speed before reaching a stop position.
***corridor*** | | JSON object | Definition of boundaries in which a mobile robot can deviate from its trajectory, e.g., to avoid obstacles.<br>

> **actions [action]**<br><br><br> } | | array | Array of actions to be executed on the edge. <br>Empty array, if no actions required. <br>An action triggered by an edge will only be active for the time that the mobile robot is traversing the edge which triggered the action. <br>When the mobile robot leaves the edge, the action will stop and the state before entering the edge will be restored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<br><br> **actions [action]** <br><br> } | | array | Array of actions to be executed on the edge. <br>Empty array, if no actions required. <br>An action triggered by an edge will only be active for the time that the mobile robot is traversing the edge which triggered the action. <br>When the mobile robot leaves the edge, the action will stop and the state before entering the edge will be restored.
```

headerId | uint32 | Header ID of the message.<br> The header ID is defined per topic and incremented by 1 with each sent (but not necessarily received) message.
timestamp | string | Timestamp (ISO 8601, UTC); YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.fffZ (e.g., "2017-04-15T11:40:03.123Z").
version | string | Version of the protocol [Major].[Minor].[Patch] (e.g., 1.3.2).
manufacturer | string | Manufacturer of the mobile robot.
serialNumber | string | Serial number of the mobile robot.
actions [action] | array | Array of actions that need to be performed immediately and are not part of the regular order.

## 7.5 Implementation of the response message

Object structure/Identifier | Data type | Description
| --- | --- | --- |
|headerId | | uint32 | Header ID of the message.<br> The headerId is defined per topic and incremented by 1 with each sent (but not necessarily received) message.
|timestamp | | string | Timestamp (ISO 8601, UTC); YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.fffZ (e.g., "2017-04-15T11:40:03.123Z").
|version | | string | Version of the protocol [Major].[Minor].[Patch] (e.g., 1.3.2).
|manufacturer | | string | Manufacturer of the mobile robot.
|serialNumber | | string | Serial number of the mobile robot.

> |responses[response] | array | Array of response objects. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|**responses[response]** | array | Array of response objects. |
```

| --------------------- | ------------- | ------------------- |
| zone{ | JSON object | |
| zoneId | string | Locally (within the zone set) unique identifier. |
| zoneType | string | Enum {'BLOCKED', 'LINE_GUIDED', 'RELEASE', 'COORDINATED_REPLANNING', 'SPEED_LIMIT', 'ACTION', 'PRIORITY', 'PENALTY', 'DIRECTED', 'BIDIRECTED'}, Zone type according to section [6.3.1 Zone types](#631-zone-types). |
| *zoneDescriptor* | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes. | 
| **vertices[vertex]**| array | Array of vertices that define the geometric shape of the zone in a counterclockwise direction. |
| maximumSpeed | float64 | Required only for SPEED_LIMIT zone as defined in chapter  [6.3.1 Zone types](#631-zone-types).| 
| **entryActions[Action]**| array | Required only for ACTION zone as defined in chapter [6.3.1 Zone types](#631-zone-types).| 
| **duringActions[Action]** | array | Required only for ACTION zone as defined in chapter [6.3.1 Zone types](#631-zone-types).| 
| **exitActions[Action]** | array | Required only for ACTION zone as defined in chapter [6.3.1 Zone types](#631-zone-types).| 

> | *releaseLossBehavior* | string | Optional only for RELEASE zone as defined in chapter [6.3.1 Zone types](#631-zone-types).|

Reviewer: If this is optional for RELEASE zones:  What is the default value?

| **Object structure** | **Data type** | **Description** |
| --------------------- | ------------- | ------------------- |
| vertex{| JSON-object| |
| x | float64 | X-coordinate described in the project-specific coordinate system |
| y <br>} | float64 | Y-coordinate described in the project-specific coordinate system |

## 7.7 Implementation of the connection message

The suggested last will topic structure is:

**uagv/v2/manufacturer/SN/connection**

The last will message is defined as a JSON encapsulated message with the following fields:

Identifier | Data type | Description
---|---|---
headerId | uint32 | Header ID of the message. <br>The headerId is defined per topic and incremented by 1 with each sent (but not necessarily received) message.
timestamp | string | Timestamp (ISO 8601, UTC); YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.fffZ (e.g., "2017-04-15T11:40:03.123Z").
version | string | Version of the protocol [Major].[Minor].[Patch] (e.g., 1.3.2).
manufacturer | string | Manufacturer of the mobile robot.
serialNumber | string | Serial number of the mobile robot.

> connectionState | string | Enum {'ONLINE', 'OFFLINE', 'HIBERNATING', 'CONNECTIONBROKEN'}<br><br>'ONLINE': connection between mobile robot and broker is active.<br><br>'OFFLINE': connection between mobile robot and broker has gone offline in a coordinated way. <br><br>'HIBERNATING': The mobile robot enters a low‑power state and stops sending state messages. A connection to the MQTT broker may remain active but is not required. This mode is intended for power saving or communication reduction. The mobile robot can later transition to ONLINE when instructed or via a configured wake‑up mechanism.<br><br> 'CONNECTIONBROKEN': the connection between mobile robot and broker has unexpectedly ended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connectionState | string | Enum {'ONLINE', 'OFFLINE', 'HIBERNATING', 'CONNECTIONBROKEN'}<br><br>'ONLINE': connection between mobile robot and broker is active.<br><br>'OFFLINE': connection between mobile robot and broker has gone offline in a coordinated way. <br><br>'HIBERNATING': The mobile robot enters a low‑power state and stops sending state messages. A connection to the MQTT broker may remain active but is not required. This mode is intended for power saving or communication reduction. The mobile robot can later transition to 'ONLINE' when instructed or via a configured wake‑up mechanism.<br><br> 'CONNECTIONBROKEN': the connection between mobile robot and broker has unexpectedly ended.
```

## 7.8 Implementation of the state message

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
headerId | | uint32 | Header ID of the message.<br> The headerId is defined per topic and incremented by 1 with each sent (but not necessarily received) message.
timestamp | | string | Timestamp (ISO 8601, UTC); YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.fffZ (e.g., "2017-04-15T11:40:03.123Z").
version | | string | Version of the protocol [Major].[Minor].[Patch] (e.g., 1.3.2).
manufacturer | | string | Manufacturer of the mobile robot.
serialNumber | | string | Serial number of the mobile robot.

> *maps[map]* | | array | Array of map objects that are currently stored on the mobile robot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***maps[map]*** | | array | Array of map objects that are currently stored on the mobile robot.
```

---|---|---|---
**nodeState** { | JSON object | |
nodeId | | string | Unique node identification.
sequenceId | | uint32 | sequence ID to discern multiple nodes with same nodeId.
*nodeDescriptor* | | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes.
released| | boolean | "true" indicates that the node is part of the base.<br>"false" indicates that the node is part of the horizon.
***nodePosition***<br><br>}| | JSON object | Node position. <br>Optional: Fleet control has this information. Can be sent additionally, e.g., for debugging purposes.

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---| --- |--- | ---
**nodePosition** { | | JSON object | Defines the position on a map in a global project-specific world coordinate system. <br>Each floor has its own map. <br>All maps shall use the same project-specific global origin.
x | m | float64 | X-position on the map in reference to the map coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.
y | m | float64 | Y-position on the map in reference to the map coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.

> *theta* | rad | float64 | Range: [-Pi ... Pi] <br><br>Absolute orientation a mobile robot shall match on a node for it to be considered traversed.<br> Optional: mobile robot can plan the path by itself.<br>If defined, the mobile robot has to assume the theta angle on this node.<br>If previous edge disallows rotation, the mobile robot shall rotate on the node.<br>If following edge has a differing orientation defined but disallows rotation, the mobile robot is to rotate on the node to the edges desired rotation before entering the edge.

Reviewer 2: Again, I think this was translated incorrectly
```suggestion
*theta* | rad | float64 | Range: [-Pi ... Pi] <br><br>Absolute orientation a mobile robot shall match on a node for it to be considered traversed.<br> Optional: mobile robot can plan the path by itself.<br>If defined, the mobile robot has to adjust its orientation to the theta angle on this node.<br>If previous edge disallows rotation, the mobile robot shall rotate on the node.<br>If following edge has a differing orientation defined but disallows rotation, the mobile robot is to rotate on the node to the edges desired rotation before entering the edge.
```

*weight* | | float64 | The weight of the control point on the curve.<br><br>Range: ]0.0 ... float64.max]<br>Default: 1.0
} | | |

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**intermediatePath** { | | JSON object |  
**polyline[waypoint]** | | array | Array of end points of segments of a polyline. 
} | | |

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**waypoint** { | | JSON object | Endpoint of a segment within a defined polyline.
x | m | float64 | X-coordinate described in the project-specific coordinate system.
y | m | float64 | Y-coordinate described in the project-specific coordinate system.
*theta* | rad | float64 | Absolute orientation of the mobile robot in the project-specific coordinate system. <br> Range: [-Pi ... Pi] </br>
eta | | string | Estimated time of arrival/traversal. ETA is formatted as a `timestamp` (ISO 8601, UTC); YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.fffZ (e.g., "2017-04-15T11:40:03.12Z").
} | | |

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**mobileRobotPosition** { | | JSON object | Defines the position on a map in world coordinates. Each floor has its own map.

> localized | | boolean | "true": mobile robot is localized. `x`, `y`, and `theta` can be trusted.<br>"false": mobile robot is not localized. `x`, `y`, and `theta` cannot be trusted.<br>Changing to the state to "false" is only allowed if the mobile robot cannot determine its position anymore. The mobile robot shall report this state via an error (`errorType` = "localizationError", `errorLevel` = "FATAL"). While this is set to "false", the mobile robot shall not resume automatic driving or continue its order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
localized | | boolean | "true": mobile robot is localized. `x`, `y`, and `theta` can be trusted.<br>"false": mobile robot is not localized. `x`, `y`, and `theta` cannot be trusted.<br>Changing to the state to "false" is only allowed if the mobile robot cannot determine its position anymore. The mobile robot shall report this state via an error (`errorType` = 'LOCALIZATION_ERROR', `errorLevel` = 'FATAL'). While this is set to "false", the mobile robot shall not resume automatic driving or continue its order.
```

*localizationScore* | | float64 | Range: [0.0 ... 1.0]<br>Describes the quality of the localization and can therefore be used, e.g., by SLAM mobile robots to describe how accurate the current position information is.<br>0.0: lowest possible confidence<br>1.0: highest possible confidence.<br>Only for logging and visualization purposes.
*deviationRange* | m | float64 | Value for the deviation range of the position in meters.<br>Only for logging and visualization purposes.
x | m | float64 | X-position on the map in reference to the map coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.

> y | m | float64 | Y-position on the map in reference to the map coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.

Reviewer 2: Consistency
```suggestion
y | m | float64 | Y-position on the map in reference to the global project-specific coordinate system. <br>Precision is up to the specific implementation.
```

---|---|---|---
**load** { | | JSON object |
*loadId* | | string | Unique identification of the load (e.g., barcode or RFID).<br><br>Empty field, if the mobile robot can identify the load but didn't identify the load yet.<br><br>Optional if the mobile robot cannot identify the load.
*loadType* | | string | Type of load.
*loadPosition* | | string | Indicates, which load handling/carrying unit of the mobile robot is used, e.g., in case the mobile robot has multiple spots/positions to carry loads.<br><br>For example: "front", "back", "positionC1", etc.<br><br>Optional for mobile robots with only one loadPosition
***boundingBoxReference*** | | JSON object | Point of reference for the location of the bounding box. <br>The point of reference is always the center of the bounding box's bottom surface (at height = 0) and is described in coordinates of the mobile robot's coordinate system.
***loadDimensions*** | | JSON object | Dimensions of the load's bounding box in meters.
*weight*<br>} | kg | float64 | Range: [0.0 ... float64.max]<br><br>Absolute weight of the load measured in kg.

| **Object structure** | **Data type** | **Description** |
| --- | --- | --- |

> | zoneRequest <br> { | JSON object | Zone information sent by the mobile robot to fleet control. |

Reviewer 2: Wording
```suggestion
| zoneRequest <br> { | JSON object | Request information sent by the mobile robot to fleet control. |
```

| requestId | string | Unique per mobile robot identifier within all active requests. |
| requestType | string | Enum {ACCESS, REAPLNNING} </br> Specifying the type of zone the request relates to. Feasible values are ACCESS or REPLANNING. |
| zoneId | string | Locally (within the zone set) unique identifier referencing the zone the request is related to. |
| zoneSetId | string | Due to the zoneId only being unique to a zoneSet, the zoneSetId is part of the request. |

> | requestStatus | string | Enum {'REQUESTED', 'GRANTED', 'REVOKED', 'EXPIRED'}<br>When stating a request, this is set to REQUESTED. After response or update from fleet control set to GRANTED or REVOKED. If lease time expires set to EXPIRED.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| requestStatus | string | Enum {'REQUESTED', 'GRANTED', 'REVOKED', 'EXPIRED'}<br>When stating a request, this is set to 'REQUESTED'. After response or update from fleet control set to 'GRANTED' or 'REVOKED'. If lease time expires set to 'EXPIRED'.|
```

9)	populate/append states refers to the `actionStates`/`nodeStates`/`edgeStates`.

### 6.6.3 Idle state of the mobile robot

> A mobile robot is idle if its nodeStates and edgeStates are empty and all actionStates are either 'FINISHED' or 'FAILED'. A new order shall only be accepted if the vehicle is idle. An order update can be accepted when the mobile robot is idle or during order execution. When idle, a vehicle can execute instantActions.

Reviewer 2: `nodeStates`, `edgeStates`, `actionStates`

See also Section [6.12.2 Traversal of nodes and entering/leaving edges](#6122-traversal-of-nodes-and-enteringleaving-edges-triggering-of-actions) for further information.

## 6.6.6 Implementation of the order message

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
headerId | | uint32 | Header ID of the message.<br> The header ID is defined per topic and incremented by 1 with each sent (but not necessarily received) message.
timestamp | | string | Timestamp (ISO 8601, UTC); YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.fffZ (e.g., "2017-04-15T11:40:03.123Z").
version | | string | Version of the protocol [Major].[Minor].[Patch] (e.g., 1.3.2)
manufacturer | | string | Manufacturer of the AGV
serialNumber | | string | Serial number of the AGV
orderId | | string | Order identification.<br> This is to be used to identify multiple order messages that belong to the same order.
orderUpdateId | | uint32 | Order update identification.<br>Is unique per orderId.<br>If an order update is rejected, this field is to be passed in the rejection message.

> *orderDescription* | | string | Additional human-readable information only for visualization purposes; this may not be used for any logical processes.

Author: Was discussed

mapId | | string | Unique identification of the map on which the position is referenced. <br> Each map has the same project-specific global origin of coordinates. <br>When an AGV uses an elevator, e.g., leading from a departure floor to a target floor, it will disappear off the map of the departure floor and spawn in the related lift node on the map of the target floor.
*mapDescription* <br> } | | string | Additional information on the map.

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---| --- |--- | ---

> **allowedDeviationXY** { | | JSON object | Indicates how precisely a vehicle shall match the position of a node for it to be considered traversed.<br>(see also [6.6.3 Order cancellation (by master control)](#663-order-cancellation-by-master-control) and [6.10.2 Traversal of nodes and entering/leaving edges, triggering of actions](#6102-traversal-of-nodes-and-enteringleaving-edges-triggering-of-actions)).<br><br> If `a` = `b`= 0.0: no deviation is allowed, which means the vehicle shall reach or pass the node position with the vehicle control point as precisely as is technically possible for the vehicle. This applies also if `allowedDeviationXY` is smaller than what is technically viable for the vehicle. If the vehicle supports this attribute, but it is not defined for this node by Master Control the vehicle shall assume the value of `a` and `b` as 0.0.<br> The coordinates of the node defines the center of the ellipse.<br>A point *(x,y)* is on or inside an ellipse if *b^2 x + a^2 y <= a^2 b^2*.

Reviewer 2: A point *(x,y)* is on or inside an ellipse if *b^2 x + a^2 y <= a^2 b^2*.

→ do we need this quick-maths-hint in the spec? It is not common for us to provide hints like that.

*retriable* | | boolean | "true": action can enter RETRIABLE state if it fails.<br>"false": action enters FAILED state directly after it fails. Default value if not defined "false"

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**edge** { | | JSON object | Directional connection between two nodes.
edgeId | | string | Unique edge identification.
sequenceId | | uint32 | Number to track the sequence of nodes and edges in an order and to simplify order updates. <br>The variable sequenceId runs across all nodes and edges of the same order and is reset when a new orderId is issued.
*edgeDescriptor* | | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes.
released | | boolean | "true" indicates that the edge is part of the base.<br>"false" indicates that the edge is part of the horizon. 
startNodeId | | string | nodeId of first node within the order.

> endNodeId | | string | nodeId of the last node within the order.

Author: ```suggestion
endNodeId | | string | Node defining the end of the edge.
```

#### Contour-based zones

For contour-based zones, the contour of the vehicle (including its load) determines zone entry and exit. Any part of the contour entering the zone is considered a zone entry. A zone exit shall be reported only when no part of the contour remains inside the zone. When a zone is reported as exited is decided by the mobile robot. 

![Figure x1 Depiction of a vehicle entering a zone based on its contour (left) and a loaded vehicle with corresponding extended bounding box exiting a zone (right)](./assets/contour_entry.png)
>Figure x1 Depiction of a vehicle entering a zone based on its contour (left) and a loaded vehicle with corresponding extended bounding box exiting a zone (right)

The following contour-based zones are defined:

| **Zone Type**| **Zone Parameters** | **Data type** | **Description** | 
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BLOCKED | none | | Vehicles shall not enter this zone. If a vehicle has entered the zone or finds itself within one, it shall stop and throw an 'BLOCKED_ZONE_VIOLATION' error with level set to 'CRITICAL'.| 

> | LINE_GUIDED | none | | No free navigation is allowed in this zone, mobile robots shall follow the defined trajectories on edges. Vehicles may only enter this zone if the route is explicitly specified by the master control in the form of a node-edge graph. Any movement of the mobile robot that requires it to enter this zone shall follow a predefined trajectory. When entering the zone, the mobile robot shall be on the trajectory of the edge that crosses the zone. The edges that enter and are inside the line-guided zone require a trajectory sent from the master control or a predefined trajectory on the vehicle. A corridor can be sent to allow the vehicle to deviate from the trajectory. | 

Author: ```suggestion
| LINE_GUIDED | none | | No free navigation is allowed in this zone, mobile robots shall follow the predefined trajectories on edges. Vehicles may only enter this zone if the route is explicitly specified by the master control in the form of a node-edge graph. Any movement of the mobile robot that requires it to enter this zone shall follow a predefined trajectory. When entering the zone, the mobile robot shall be on the trajectory of the edge that crosses the zone. The edges that enter and are inside the line-guided zone require a trajectory sent from the master control or a predefined trajectory on the vehicle. A corridor can be sent to allow the vehicle to deviate from the trajectory. | 
```

'DIRECTED' zones define a preferred direction of travel within the zone. 'BIDIRECTED' zones define a travel direction and its opposite direction to be used. Other directions shall be avoided. The `directedLimitation` and `bidirectedLimitation` enums specify the limits within which the vehicle may deviate from its direction of travel. The direction of travel is the velocity vector in the project-specific coordinate system.

![Figure x2 Depiction of a vehicle entering a zone based on its kinematic center (left) and a loaded vehicle exiting a zone based on its kinematic center (right)](./assets/kinematic_center_entry.png)
>Figure x2 Depiction of a vehicle entering a zone based on its kinematic center (left) and a loaded vehicle exiting a zone based on its kinematic center (right)

| **Zone Type**| **Zone Parameters** | **Data type** | **Description** | 
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PRIORITY | | | The workspace encompassed by this zone is associated with an incentive for the vehicle to plan its route through this zone compared to an otherwise equivalent area without such a zone on the map.| 

> | | priorityFactor | float64 | [0.0...1.0]<br>Relative factor that determines the preference of the zone over a workspace without a zone. 0.0 means no preference, as if there was no zone, 1.0 is maximum preference.|

Reviewer 2: Should we exclude 0.0 from the domain of definition

When receiving a response with `responseType` 'REVOKED', the vehicle shall set the `requestStatus` to 'REVOKED' and not enter the 'RELEASE' zone. When the `leaseExpiry` has passed, the requestStatus shall be set to 'EXPIRED' and the zone shall not be entered. If the vehicle is already inside the 'RELEASE' zone when the `leaseExpiry` has passed or the request is 'REVOKED', it shall report a warning and react according to the `releaseLossBehavior` defined in the zone definition.

![Figure x3 Zone request behavior for a RELEASE zone.](./assets/request_release_zone_access.png)
>Figure x3 Zone request behavior for a RELEASE zone.

The interaction between the mobile robot and the master control for 'COORDINATED_REPLANNING' zones shall be according to figure x4.

The vehicle shall choose one of the trajectories of all 'GRANTED' requests to the zone and set the corresponding `requestStatus`to 'GRANTED' while removing all other requests from its state.

> When receiving a response with `responseType` 'REVOKED', the vehicle shall set the `requestStatus` to 'REVOKED' and not enter the 'COORDINATED_REPLANNING' zone. When the `leaseExpiry` has passed, the `requestStatus` shall be set to 'EXPIRED' and the zone shall not be entered. If the vehicle is already inside the 'RELEASE' zone when the `leaseExpiry` has passed or the request is 'REVOKED', it shall stop driving and report a warning. To continue, the vehicle shall state a new request.

Author: Changed to: When receiving a response with `responseType` 'REVOKED', the mobile robot shall remove the request from its state.

**actionState** { | | JSON object |
actionId | |string | Unique identifier of the action.
*actionType* | | string | Type of the action.<br><br>Optional: Only for informational or visualization purposes. Fleet control is aware of action type as dispatched in the order.
*actionDescriptor* | | string | A user-defined, human-readable name or descriptor. This shall not be used for logical purposes.
actionStatus | | string | Enum {'WAITING', 'INITIALIZING', 'RUNNING', 'PAUSED', 'FINISHED', 'FAILED'}<br><br>See Section [6.5.8 Action states](#658-action-states).
*actionResult*<br>} | | string | Description of the result, e.g., the result of an RFID reading.<br><br>Errors will be transmitted in errors.

Object structure | Unit | Data type | Description
---|---|---|---
**batteryState** { | | JSON object | 
batteryCharge | % | float64 | State of Charge: <br> if mobile robot only provides values for good or bad battery levels, these will be indicated as 20% (bad) and 80% (good). 
*batteryVoltage* | V | float64 | Battery voltage.
*batteryCurrent* | A | float64 | Battery current in Ampere (A).
*batteryHealth* | % | int8 | Range: [0 ... 100]<br><br>State describing the battery's health. 

> charging | | boolean | “true”: charging in progress.<br>“false”: the mobile robot is currently not charging.

Reviewer 2: Add same definition as previously
```suggestion
charging | | boolean | “true”: charging in progress.<br>“false”: the mobile robot is currently not charging. Only to be reported as "false" if the robot is available to take orders.
```

| &emsp;*trajectory.controlPoints* | uint32 | Maximum number of control points per trajectory processable by the mobile robot. |
| &emsp;*state.nodeStates* | uint32 | Maximum number of nodeStates sent by the mobile robot, maximum number of nodes in base of mobile robot. |
| &emsp;*state.edgeStates* | uint32 | Maximum number of edgeStates sent by the mobile robot, maximum number of edges in base of mobile robot. |
| &emsp;*state.loads* | uint32 | Maximum number of load objects sent by the mobile robot. |
| &emsp;*state.actionStates* | uint32 | Maximum number of objects in actionStates, instantActionStates or zoneActionStates sent by the mobile robot. |
| &emsp;*state.errors* | uint32 | Maximum number of errors sent by the mobile robot in one state message. |
| &emsp;*state.information* | uint32 | Maximum number of information sent by the mobile robot in one state message. |
| &emsp;*error.errorReferences* | uint32 | Maximum number of error references sent by the mobile robot for each error. |
| &emsp;*information.infoReferences* | uint32 | Maximum number of info references sent by the mobile robot for each information. |

> | } | | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 &emsp;*zoneSet.zones* | uint32 | Maximum number of zones sent by the mobile robot for each zoneSet. |
| } | | |
```

Are we missing more here?
